Merge `db-tools:gdprify` and `db-tools:anonymize` for a more GDPR-friendly workflow (#75)
makinacorpus/DbToolsBundle: docs/content/anonymization/command.md

---
outline:
   - 2
   - 3
---

# Anonymization command

Considering your anonymization has been configured, you can
now anonymize a backup file running:

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize path/to/your/backup/to/anonymized
```

This command will successively:

1. Backup your current database,
2. Restore the given backup file,
3. Anonymize the data from the given backup file,
4. Backup the newly anonymized database, **overwritting the given backup file**,
5. Restore your database to its original state from the backup done in step 1.

::: warning
The `db-tools:anonymize` command alone is not enought to ensure you follow GDPR best practices.
It depends on:

* How you correctly configured your anonymization (obviously),

> * Where you run this command: you are going to anonymized a backup file,

Reviewer: `you are going to anonymized` ? without the final `d` ?

  this backup file contains sensitive data. Thus, following GDPR recommendations
  this **backup file should never transit on an unsecured environment**.

Read the next section to learn more about a proper workflow.
:::

## A GDPR-friendly workflow

Here is an exemple of workflow - that follows GDPR recommendations - to retrieve anonymized production
data on your local environement.

> ### Hypotheses

Reviewer: `Prerequisites` maybe ?

> * You have 2 secured environments : *production* and *preproduction*,

Reviewer: ... and you can securely copy files from one to another,

Reviewer: It could be any environment, not even preproduction, all it needs is the CLI to work and a database, it doesn't even need to be a complete working env. This might be nice to add as a tip under ?

Reviewer: For what it worth, you could even dump and restore the production database in another schema or database directly from the production CLI, then run the GDPR workflow by enforcing the new database using an environment variable:

```
bin/console ...:backup
DATABASE_URL="vendor://safe_not_prod/database" bin/console ...:restore
DATABASE_URL="vendor://safe_not_prod/database" bin/console ...:anonymize:run
```

Author: For the last comment, I agree, but do we want to intensively use the database server to anonymize in production?

(I guess you'll tell me the `DATABASE_URL="vendor://safe_not_prod/database"` could be on another database server...)

* You can stop your service on preproduction,
* Your anonymization is well configured, every sensitive data has been
  mapped to an anonymizer to erased/hashed/randomized it.

### Workflow

1. Run `console db-tools:backup` on your production environment or
   choose an existing backup with `console db-tools:restore --list`,
2. Securly download your backup file from your *production* to your *preproduction* environment,
3. Stop services on your preproduction to ensure no one is using it,
4. Run `console db-tools:anonymize path/to/your/production/backup` to generate
   a new backup cleaned from its sensitive data,
5. Restart services on your preproduction,
6. Download the anonymized backup to your local machine
7. Restore the backup with `console db-tools:restore --filename path/to/your/anonymized/backup`

## Options

You can specify the behaviour of the  `db-tools:anonymize`command with some options detailed below.

### Anonymizing current database

The main purpose of this command is to provide a way to anonymize a backup file. But

> it could also be used to anonymized current database with `--current-database`.

Reviewer: `anonymized` -> `anonymize`

---
outline:
   - 2
   - 3
---

# Anonymization command

Considering your anonymization has been configured, you can

> now anonymize a backup file running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
now anonymize a backup file by running:
```

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize path/to/your/backup/to/anonymized
```

This command will successively:

1. Backup your local database,
2. Restore the given backup file,
3. Anonymize the data from the given backup file,

> 4. Backup the newly anonymized database, **overwritting the given backup file**,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Backup the newly anonymized database, **by overwriting the given backup file**,
```

> 5. Restore your database to its original state from the backup done in step 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Restore your database to its original state from the backup produced at step 1.
```

::: warning

> The `db-tools:anonymize` command alone is not enought to ensure you follow GDPR best practices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `db-tools:anonymize` command alone is not enough to ensure you follow GDPR best practices.
```

It depends on:

* How you correctly configured your anonymization (obviously),

> * Where you run this command: you are going to anonymize a backup file,
>   this backup file contains sensitive data. Thus, following GDPR recommendations
>   this **backup file should never transit on an unsecured environment**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Where you run this command: anonymizing a backup file means it contains
  sensitive data, hence, following GDPR recommendations, this **backup file
  should never transit on an unsecured environment**.
```

Reviewer 2: I replaced "thus" by "hence", but both are valid actually.

Read the next section to learn more about a proper workflow.
:::

## A GDPR-friendly workflow

Here is an exemple of workflow - that follows GDPR recommendations - to retrieve anonymized production

> data on your local environement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data on your local environment.
```

> Here is an exemple of workflow - that follows GDPR recommendations - to retrieve anonymized production
> data on your local environement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example of workflow - that follows GDPR recommendations - to retrieve anonymized production
data on your local environment.
```

### Prerequisites

> * You have 2 secured environments : *production* and *another_env* (such as a preproduction)
>   and you can securely copy files from one to another,
> * You can stop your service on *another_env*,
> * Your anonymization is well configured, every sensitive data has been
>   mapped to an anonymizer to erased/hashed/randomized it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You have a second secured environment besides your *production* (such as a preproduction)
  and you can securely copy files from one to another,
* You can shut down your service on this second environment,
* Your anonymization is well configured: every sensitive data has been
  mapped to an anonymizer that will erase/hash/randomize it.
```

::: note

> Note that *another_env* could be any environment, not only preproduction, all it needs is the
> the Symfony Console to work and a database. It doesn't need to be a complete working env.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the second environment could be any environment, not only a preproduction. All it needs to work
is the Symfony Console and a database. It doesn't need to be a complete working env.
```

:::

> ### Workflow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Workflow

Let's call *another_env* the environment we have besides the production one.
```

Reviewer 2: Or "Let's assume the environment we have besides the production one is called *another_env*."

1. Run `console db-tools:backup` on your production environment or
   choose an existing backup with `console db-tools:restore --list`,

> 2. Securly download your backup file from your *production* to your *another_env* environment,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Securely download your backup file from your *production* to your *another_env* environment,
```

3. Stop services on your *another_env* to ensure no one is using it,
4. Run `console db-tools:anonymize path/to/your/production/backup` to generate
   a new backup cleaned from its sensitive data,
5. Restart services on your *another_env*,
6. Download the anonymized backup from *another_env* to your local machine

> 7. Restore the backup with `console db-tools:restore --filename path/to/your/anonymized/backup`

Reviewer 2: Before describing each step, you could even introduce the two environments by giving their respective identifier (*production* and *another_env*), thus, you could remove all "your" and "environment" occurrences in the workflow description.

For example: 
> 2. Securely download your backup file from *production* to *another_env*,

Author: done directly on main

## Options

> You can specify the behaviour of the  `db-tools:anonymize`command with some options detailed below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can modify the behaviour of the `db-tools:anonymize` command with some options detailed below.
```

### Anonymizing local database

The main purpose of this command is to provide a way to anonymize a backup file. But
it could also be used to anonymize local database with `--local-database`.

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize --local-database
```

### Do not restore initial state after anonymization

You can choose to not restore initial database with the `--no-restore` option.

> With this option, step 1 and 5 will be skipped during execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this option, steps 1 and 5 will be skipped during execution.
```

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize --no-restore
```

### Only anonymize specific targets

Use this option if you want to anonymize only some specific targets during the process.

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize --target target_1 --taget target_2
# or

> console db-tools:anonymize --t target_1 --t target_2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
console db-tools:anonymize -t target_1 -t target_2
```

Author: done directly on main

```

::: tip
To know all your available targets, launch `db-tools:anonymization:dump-config`
:::

### Exclude targets from anonymization

Use this option if you want to exclude some specific targets from anonymization.

```sh
console db-tools:anonymize --exclude target_1 --exclude target_2
# or

> console db-tools:anonymize --x target_1 --x target_2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
console db-tools:anonymize -x target_1 -x target_2
```

Author: done directly on main

```

::: tip
To know all your available targets, launch `db-tools:anonymization:dump-config`
:::

### Split update queries

By default, the anonymization process use one update query per table.

> For debug purpose, it could be usefull to run not only one update query per table

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For debug purpose, it could be useful to run not only one update query per table
```

but one update query per target. To do so, use the `--split-per-column` option.

::: info

> Learn more about how the anonymization process build these update queries reading

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Learn more about how the anonymization process builds these update queries reading
```

Author: done directly on main
